Hyperelastic constitutive modeling of native and enzymatically mediated degraded articular cartilage
Asif Istiak1,#, Saiful Islam1,,#, Malek Adouni3, Tanvir R. Faisal1,*
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, LA, 70503, USA
3Abdullah Al Salem University, Biomedical and Instrumentation Engineering, Khalidiya, Kuwait. r
#Equal contribution 


*Corresponding author: 
Tanvir R. Faisal
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Louisiana at Lafayette
LA, 70503, USA
Email: tanvir.faisal@louisiana.edu  
Tel: +1 (337) 482-5360









Abstract 
This research demonstrates a systematic curve-fitting approach for acquiring parametric values of the hyperelastic constitutive model for both native and enzymatically mediated degenerated cartilage, facilitating the development of finite element modeling of cartilage. Several phenomenological hyperelastic constitutive models were tested to adequately capture the changes in cartilage mechanics that vary with the differential/unequal abundance of degradative matrix metalloproteinases. Trauma and physiological condition overexpress collagenases (MMP-1) and gelatinases (MMP-9) which alters mechanical load bearing capacity digesting extracellular matrix. The material parameters in constitutive equation of each model are significant for developing computational physical interpretation and implement high resolution quantitative description of mechanical properties of cartilage.. Stress-strain responses obtained from indentation test were fitted with selected Ogden, polynomial, reduced polynomial, and Van der Waals hyperelastic constitutive models based on their adjustable parameters (material constants). The goodness of fit of the 2nd order reduced polynomial, and Van der Waals exhibited the closest data fitting with the experimental stress-strain distributions of healthy and degraded articular cartilage. The coefficient of the shear modulus of the 2nd order reduced polynomial decreased gradually by 21.9% to 80.1% with enzymatic collagen loss and 28.5% to 69.2% for the Van der Waals. The Van der Waals model also provided an insight into the proteoglycan (PG) matrix depletion from molecular-level interaction. Our findings exhibited that the major coefficients of the models were reduced in the degenerated cartilages, and the reduction varied differentially with the relative abundance of MMPs-1 and 9, correlating the severity of degeneration. This work advances the understanding of cartilage mechanics and offers an understanding of the impact of biochemical effects (enzymatic effect) on cartilage degradation.

Keywords: Phenomenological model, hyperelastic constitutive model, MMP, enzymatic degradation, articular cartilage.


	•	Introduction 
Articular cartilage is a thin layer of soft tissue covering the extremities of bones within diarthrodial joints, serving as the contact surface for transferring loads between bones and enabling smooth joint articulation with minimal friction (Ateshian et al. 2005). Soft tissue deformations and distortions encompass intricate mechanisms that are yet to be fully understood. The degeneration of cartilage due to osteoarthritis (OA) alters its extracellular matrix (ECM) comprising primarily type 2 collagen fibril and proteoglycan (PG), leading to changes in its mechanical properties (Mixon et al. 2021; Robinson et al. 2016; Setton et al. 1999). Whilst aggrecan (PG) loss can be reversed, collagen degradation is irreversible, and cartilage cannot be repaired once collagen is largely digested (Karsdal et al. 2008). The ECM degradation, which is primarily orchestrated by proteases like MMPs, is triggered by proinflammatory cytokines. The cartilage degradation caused by the upregulation of MMPs is primarily influenced by sex hormones (Liu et al. 2014), obesity, and aging (Sun et al. 2021). Classically, MMPs play a dominant role in the breakdown of the ECM macromolecules and are collectively capable of degrading all ECM components (Grenier et al. 2014). An accurate understanding of the mechanical alterations could enhance the comprehension of the onset and advancement of OA, potentially paving the way for enhanced treatment approaches. An accurate understanding of the mechanical alterations could enhance the comprehension of the onset and advancement of OA, potentially paving the way for enhanced treatment approaches. 
Previous studies have often modeled cartilage degradation using variety of enzymes such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), interleukin-6 (IL-6) (Sui et al. 2009), IL-1 (Kar et al. 2016a; Kar et al. 2016b), chondroitinase ABC and hyaluronidase (Merrild et al. 2022), bacterial collagenase (Grenier et al. 2014), Collagenase type VII and trypsin (Saarakkala et al. 2004; Töyräs et al. 1999; Wang et al. 2008), MMP-13 (Nishida et al. 2008) to simulate ECM degradation in the context of OA, but the collective effect of metalloproteinases on the biomechanical properties of cartilage tissue has been scarcely or not systematically studied. Furthermore, the collagenases, MMP-1 and MMP-13, have predominant roles in OA; generally, the cleavage of collagen type II occurs in the pericellular and superficial sites of the articular cartilage, where both MMPs-1 and 13 are localized (Fernandes et al. 1998; Moldovan et al. 1997; Xia et al. 2002). Expression of other MMPs such as MMPs-2, 9, and 3, is also elevated in arthritis, and these enzymes degrade non-collagen matrix components of the joints (Burrage et al. 2006). Once the collagen triple helix is cleaved by the collagenases, the denatured collagens (gelatins) are digested by MMP-9 (gelatinases), which is elevated in moderate to severe OA patients and contributes to the cartilage ECM loss (Smith Jr 2006). Hence, in this work, we considered collagenases (MMP-1) and gelatinases (MMP-9) cocktail to represent OA cartilage. Cartilage, ligaments, tendons and other soft biological tissues, polymers, and gels exhibit nonlinear elasticity (Sasson et al. 2012; Shearer 2015). Although several nonlinear approaches such as hyperelastic (Brown et al. 2009; Henak et al. 2014; Robinson et al. 2016), viscoelastic (Ma and Arruda 2013; Richard et al. 2013), and poroelastic  (Tan et al. 2023) models were utilized to portray mechanical properties of cartilage,  we selected widely used the hyperelastic characterization (Mansouri and Darijani 2014; Tan et al. 2023) in this work due to comparatively less computationally expensive and well validated tool in predicting transient mechanical behavior of cartilage loading phase. The phenomenon of hyperelasticity is commonly investigated using a phenomenological approach if the stress–strain curve of the material can be accurately modeled by hyperelastic constitutive material models. Hyperelasticity is commonly studied using a phenomenological approach when the material's stress-strain behavior can be accurately described by hyperelastic constitutive models. Phenomenological models have been formulated based on macroscopic experimental observations, aiming to depict the elastic behavior of these materials. Hence, in this study, we primarily tested different phenomenological models such as neo-Hookean (Treloar 1975), Yeoh (Yeoh 1993), Ogden (Ogden 1972), Mooney-Rivlin (Mooney 1940; Rivlin 1948), polynomial (Rivlin and Saunders 1951), Van der Waals (Kilian et al. 1986), and reduced polynomial (Lin et al. 2023). The material parameters of the phenomenological models can be obtained by fitting the model equation to the experimental data of a wide variety of materials without understanding the material’s microstructures. These material models, characterized by several adjustable parameters, are derived from a strain energy function that considers energetic path relationships, correlating the strain energy of a material with the deformation gradient. The strain energy based phenomenological approach has been often utilized to characterize biological tissues and elastomers (Karimi et al. 2017; Previati et al. 2017) as it is computationally efficient.
Cartilage experiences significant finite deformations in vivo, with physiological strain levels up to 20% (Bingham et al. 2008; Carter et al. 2015; Coleman et al. 2013; Patel et al. 2019; Sutter et al. 2015). While simulating the physiological loading in a relatively faster loading rate (Henak et al. 2014; Park et al. 2004; Pierce et al. 2009), the cartilage behaves as an incompressible elastic solid (Ateshian et al. 2007; Pierce et al. 2009). Cartilage behaves as an incompressible elastic solid (Ateshian et al. 2007; Pierce et al. 2009) when subjected to physiological loading at a relatively high rate in simulations (Henak et al. 2014; Park et al. 2004; Pierce et al. 2009). Hyperelastic modeling is suitable for cartilage tissue because the strain energy function not only captures the nonlinear stress–strain relationship but also accounts for its incompressible behavior (Henak et al. 2014). However, there is limited data available regarding the hyperelastic material properties of healthy human cartilage (Anderson et al. 2008; Henak et al. 2014; Khaniki et al. 2023; Pierce et al. 2009; Weizel et al. 2022), and very few models to determine the material constants of degenerated cartilage (Nissinen et al. 2021; Robinson et al. 2016). However, there is limitation of comprehensive data on the hyperelastic properties of healthy human cartilage (Anderson et al. 2008; Henak et al. 2014; Khaniki et al. 2023; Pierce et al. 2009; Weizel et al. 2022), and only a few models exist for determining the material constants of degenerated cartilage (Nissinen et al. 2021; Robinson et al. 2016). Prior research demonstrated a correlation between the material constants and tissue composition (Kiviranta et al. 2006; Rieppo et al. 2003) and/or OA severity (Armstrong and Mow 1982; Kleemann et al. 2005a; Kleemann et al. 2005b; Saarakkala et al. 2003). Although the material constants in hyperelastic cartilage models are likely to alter due to OA, the magnitude of these changes and whether they can be anticipated based on variations in tissue structure or the severity of OA are currently unknown.
This study focuses on the computational simulation of native and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) degraded cartilage based on experiments involving a systematic analysis of fitting incompressible hyperelastic constitutive laws to stress-strain experimental data. We hypothesize that the hyperelastic material constants change with degradation to the cartilage tissue, and these changes vary with the differential/unequal abundance of degradative enzymes collagenases (MMP-1) and gelatinases (MMP-9). The experimental stress-strain responses were fitted with hyperelastic constitutive models based on the adjustable parameters (material constants) of selected Ogden, polynomial, reduced polynomial, and Van der Waals models. Afterward, finite element analysis (FEA) was conducted using the calibrated materials constants. Therefore, the aims of the present study were to 1) determine the hyperelastic material constants of normal and degraded bovine knee cartilage using isotropic hyperelastic models, 2) determine correlation, if there is any, between the hyperelastic material constants and cartilage degeneration. 
	•	Materials and methods
2.1 Experiment
2.1.1 Sample preparation
Articular cartilage plugs attached to subchondral bone were extracted from the stifle joints of mature cows (between 18 and 24 months old) sourced from a local slaughterhouse. The joints were preserved frozen at -80 oC until sample extraction from the medial and lateral femoral condyles utilizing a mosaicplasty tabular chisel (Smith & Nephew 7,209,234) at ambient conditions.  A total of 30 articular cartilage explants were harvested from both knees of 6 knees from 3 cows, each with a diameter of 3.5 mm and thickness of 5 mm with subchondral bone attached. Throughout the extraction process, phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was used to moisten the articular surface, safeguarding the cartilage from drying out. Cartilages showing any surface defects or fissures upon visible inspection were carefully excluded during the extraction. The collected samples were preserved at -20 oC enveloped in PBS-moistened gauze until required for testing. To mitigate the effects of freeze-thaw cycles, all samples underwent single thaw cycle(Changoor et al. 2010). Previous studies have indicated that freeze-thaw cycles have minimal impact on the mechanical properties of articular cartilage explants(Athanasiou et al. 1994; Szarko et al. 2010). Prior to testing, individual sample thickness, exclusive of the subchondral bone, was assessed using a needle probe of the micromechanical tester, Mach-1 v500c (Biomomentum Inc.). 
Before testing, the thickness of each sample, excluding the subchondral bone, was measured using a needle probe at the four corners of the plug with the Mach-1 v500c micromechanical tester (Biomomentum Inc.). The mean thickness of cartilage was determined  mm (Fig.  1).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)

Fig. 1 (a) Sample extraction from femoral condyles, (b) Extracted cartilage explant with subchondral bone, and (c) Indentation testing of cartilage samples in Mach-1 v500c mechanical tester
2.1.2 Sample degradation
Each explant was individually placed inside a standard well plate, followed by treatment with MMPs that were reconstituted in a PBS solution. To simulate the in vivo conditions, we prepared a 2% agarose gel using solid agar (Sigma-Aldrich) and TAE buffer (Sigma-Aldrich), carefully pipetting it around each sample until only the top of the articular surface remained exposed to the enzyme solution (Mixon et al. 2022; Mixon et al. 2021). To induce downward degradation from the articular surface, each explant was individually placed in the wells of a standard well plate. The agarose gel was allowed to cool and solidify for 30 min; after that, the activated human recombinant MMP-1 and MMP-9 (BioVision, Milpitas, CA) were loaded onto the articular top surface at varying concentrations. These enzymes were applied to sample groups of 10, as outlined in Table 1. The concentration scale of MMPs was chosen based on earlier studies concerning the pro-form of enzyme detection in synovial fluid from arthritis patients using immunoassays (ELISA) (Tchetverikov et al. 2005).
Table 1 Concentration ratios of MMP-1 and MMP-9 used to degrade articular cartilage samples
MMP-1 (c) 
concentration (ng/ml)
MMP-9 (g) 
concentration (ng/ml)
c:g ratio
4
4
1:1
2
6
1:3
6
2
3:1

2.1.3 Indentation testing
Indentation has been widely used testing method for assessing the mechanical properties of soft tissues such as articular cartilage (Chen et al. 2004; Korhonen et al. 2002; Lyyra et al. 1999; Mixon 2021) and is adopted in this study to characterize the structural integrity of the cartilage. The cartilage samples were each placed in an osteochondral core holder and submerged in a PBS bath to avert desiccation of the articular surface after removal from the MMP cocktail. Compressive stress-relaxation tests were conducted using a spherical indenter (1 mm dia.) via the Mach-1 testing apparatus. (Bae et al. 2007; Bae et al. 2006). The spherical indenter was used to reduce cartilage damage and apply more centralized compression than the pyramid and other sharp indenter counterparts. Each sample was compressed at a strain rate of 0.1%/sec until total strain reached 20%, falling within the elastic limit and mimicking a typical physiological loading condition. All samples were subjected to the indentation tests pre- and post-exposure to MMPs, enabling comparison of the mechanical properties before and after enzymatic treatment. Different factors, such as the variety of samples, specific characteristics of the site, and age differences, can contribute to variations in the biomechanics of cartilage. Additionally, MMP-1 and MMP-9 enzymes can affect the orientation of cartilage fibrils, making it difficult to maintain consistency in empirical data (Mixon et al. 2022; Mixon et al. 2021). To mitigate these variations, distinct control baselines were established for each type of degradation.
2.2 Hyperelastic materials modeling
2.2.1 Kinematics of finite deformations
To simulate the hyperelastic behavior of cartilage, the principles of nonlinear continuum mechanics were applied. This theory describes the physical phenomena of the system at a continuum level without explicitly taking into account the intricate microstructure. The continuum bodycomprises continuum points   and exhibits a continuous and homogeneous distribution of matter in both space and time. The dimensions of a continuum body are greater than those of the microstructures within the body. The kinematics of finite deformation of the undeformed body  at time  can be explained through the deformation mapsthat map the position in the reference or material configurationat the initial position to its new positionin the deformed, current, or spatial configuration . The deformation gradient to map undeformed configurations to deformed configurations is defined as (Gasser and Holzapfel 2002). For a uniaxial deformation characterized by compression and tension, where the material is incompressible and homogeneous, the deformation gradient is expressed as follows:
 with and 
where, ,, and  are the principal stretches along the principal direction and  is the axial stretch. are the square roots of the eigenvalues of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor  defined as , whose invariants are ,, and such that
							(1)
The cartilage has been assumed to be isotropic and nearly incompressible for the purpose of this study such that the third invariant equals one (Moerman et al. 2020; Pelliciari and Tarantino 2020; Steck et al. 2019).
2.2.2 Isotropic hyperelastic material models
Articular cartilage typically undergoes large deformation under compressive (Oloyede and Broom 1996) as well as tensile loading (Woo et al. 1976). In the context of cartilage, we focused on the large-strain and nonlinear time-independent material response, often referred to finite hyperelastic response, neglecting viscous and porous effects. The constitutive law governing the hyperelastic material relates the strain energy density function and the deformation gradient, , the invariants , and  or the principal stretches , and (Holzapfel 2002). A stress measure suitable for analyzing experimental data is the nominal stress, calculated as the force divided by the undeformed area of the continuum body. This is also known as Piola stress and is defined as 									(2)
where is the Cauchy stress tensor. The cartilage is assumed to exhibit incompressible material behavior such as . The assumption of incompressibility simplifies the model equations without compromising accuracy.
2.2.3 Hyperelastic material models calibration
In this study, we selected four hyperelastic materials models (1st order Ogden, 3rd order polynomial, 2nd order reduced polynomial, and Van der Waals) to best represent the deformation behavior of the native and degraded cartilage tissue after testing a number of hyperelastic material models. While other models such as Mooney-Rivlin, neo-Hookean, Arruda-Boyce, Yeoh, Ogden (2nd and 3rd order), polynomial (1st – 2nd order), and reduced polynomial (1st and 3rd order) were initially also considered, they were unable to adequately fit the experimental data or displayed instability. As a result, these models were dismissed for further consideration. All the calibrations for the hyperelastic data fitting were conducted using MCalibration 7.0 software (Veryst Engineering, Needham, Massachusetts, USA). During the calibration (optimization) process, the objective was to minimize the mean square difference (MSD) between the experimental data (stress value at certain strain rate) and the output of the hyperelastic models being calibrated (Fig. 2). The calibration process involved an extensive search for optimal parameters to minimize the fitness function. Among various definitions of fitness function (Fernández et al. 2018; López-Campos et al. 2019), we used mean square difference, which represents how well a given hyperelastic material model fits the experimental data, stress herein. In hyperelastic material modeling, the fitness function evaluates how accurately the strain energy function (with its specific parameters) reproduces the stress-strain behavior observed in experiments. A lower value of the fitness function indicates a better fit of the model to the experimental data. 
This included an initial random search followed by the application of Levenberg–Marquardt and Nelder–Mead simplex methods. As an optimization technique, Levenberg–Marquardt combines the features of gradient descent and Gauss-Newton methods to solve nonlinear least squares problems (Gavin 2019; Liggett and Chen 1994). The algorithm iteratively adjusts the model parameters to minimize the sum of the squared differences between the predicted and observed stress values.  For a specific model, material parameters are initially identified using genetic algorithms. Then these material parameters obtained with this method are used as initial guess of the classical Levenberg-Marquardt method(Levenberg 1944; Marquardt 1963) If this method fails to converge, the mean square method is subsequently applied(Marckmann and Verron 2006).
 Additionally, the simplex Nelder-Mead methods are numerical optimization techniques used to find the minimum or maximum of functions in multidimensional spaces(Luersen et al. 2004). This algorithm works systematically moving and reshaping this simplex to find the optimal set of parameters. This method particularly is fit for this purpose since it minimizes the objective functions during parameter identification of hyperelastic models(Lagarias et al. 1998). These used optimization methods aimed to find the optimal set of parameters that make the hyperelastic model best represent the actual material properties observed in experiments. 



Fig. 2 Workflow of the hyperelastic material model calibration process
Ogden model
The Ogden hyperelastic model, applied to different materials including rubber, polymers, and biological tissues (Budday et al. 2020; Ogden 1972), is a phenomenological model that utilize the strain energy potential that is defined by the principal stretches as follows,
                          	(3)
where  is the deviatoric principal stretches, , , , are the principal stretches;  is the total volume ratio,  is the elastic volume ratio, is the order of material parameters, and , , and  are temperature dependent material parameters. for a physically realistic response and material stability. 
In the application of 1st order Ogden model, a constraint was incorporated such that . Material behavior was presumed incompressible, leading to the exclusion of  from the optimization process. Consequently, and were the material parameters optimized during the curve fitting process. A negligible compressibility, quantified as , was allocated to  during FEA with all the selected models.
Polynomial model
The polynomial strain energy function is presented as follows:
                                           	(4)
where and represent the first and second strain invariants of the Cauchy-Green strain tensor, and are the material parameters that exhibit temperature-dependence. and represent the same as in Eq. (3). While the parameter  can attain values as high as six, instances of  exceeding two typically occur when both strain invariants are incorporated. In this study, we assessed 3rd order polynomial strain energy function, resulting in nine hyperelastic parameters. Distinct variations of the polynomial model can be generated by setting specific coefficients to zero. For instance, when with are set to zero, we get the reduced polynomial form.
Reduced polynomial model
The expression of reduced polynomial model, derived form of Eq. (4), is as follows,
                                     		(5)
A 2nd order reduced polynomial strain energy function was examined in this study, deriving two hyperelastic parameters. Evidently, this model does not consider the second strain invariants. It is generally recommended to utilize hyperelastic models that are independent of the second invariant when calibration is possible through only a single type of experiment (Bidhendi et al. 2020; Kaliske and Rothert 1997; Yeoh 1993). Based on the satisfactory alignment of this model with our experimental data, this hyperelastic model was considered.
Van der Waals model
The formula for Van der Waals also known as Kilian model (Kilian 1981) strain energy equation is,
	(6)
where  is the locking stretch, is the initial shear modulus,  is the global interaction parameter, andcontrols compressibility. Here, and could be defined as
                                                                   	(7)
and                                                                    	(8)
Here, is the invariant mixture parameter. For , the Van der Waals potential will be dependent on the first invariant only. 
2.2.4. Goodness of fit
The stress was derived from the strain energy density function of particular model by taking the appropriate derivatives with respect to the deformation gradient. An objective function is defined to measure the difference between the experimental data and the model predictions. A least-squares error function was used.The goodness of fit was evaluated by the coefficient of determination as follows. 
                                                                      			(9)
where  is the sum of squares of the residual, represents the total sum of squares.
								(10)
								(11)
where  is the measured value, is the fitted function, and is the mean value of the measured data. The coefficient of determination ranges from 0 to 1, where 1 represents that the fitted parameters perfectly capture the experimental graph. A value smaller than 1 indicates certain aberration form the fitted function. 
	•	Finite element analysis
FE modeling was conducted in Abaqus 6.14 (Dassault Systèmes) to simulate the experimental indentation tests to capture the nonlinear stress–strain responses of both healthy and degraded cartilages. To accommodate this, we have implemented the material constants of the hyperelastic models considered herein. 
2.3.1 FE modeling of indentation test
To simulate the indentation test, a cylindrical sample of cartilage (3 mm in diameter and 1.375 mm in thickness) was modeled along with a rigid spherical indenter of 1 mm in diameter. The model was meshed with C3D8H element—Abaqus 3D continuum element with 8-node linear brick, hybrid with constant pressure. This element is particularly suitable for modeling nearly incompressible materials like cartilage (Jaramillo et al. 2015; Suchocki 2017). This hybrid element helps prevent volumetric locking in incompressible materials. The discretization in the cartilage sample was designed to have a finer mesh of 0.025 mm around the sphere while the remaining] were coarse mesh of 0.25 mm towards the model's boundaries. (Fig. 3). A mesh convergence was performed to achieve mesh independence on the computation of the field variables and the global response of the cartilage. 

Fig. 3 Finite element meshed model of the cartilage sample with rigid indenter and fixed boundary conditions at the bottom
Similar to the experiment, the model's base was completely fixed, and frictionless contact was modeled between the indenter ball and the articular cartilage surface. Quasi-static finite element simulations were executed in the Abaqus/Standard solver. The model parameters included an indentation of 0.275 mm over a 200-sec timeframe, simulating a strain of 20% at a strain rate of 0. 1%/sec. The parameters for the hyperelastic models were determined from the initial curve fitting, as mentioned in Section 2.2, and incorporated into the hyperelastic constitutive models to conduct FEA.
	•	Results 
All the specimens, irrespective of control or degraded groups, were subjected to 20% of bulk strain in accordance with the physiological strain limit (Bingham et al. 2008; Carter et al. 2015; Coleman et al. 2013; Patel et al. 2019; Sutter et al. 2015). Figure 4 shows the experimental stress-strain plots along with the fitted hyperplastic hyperelastic material models for both native (Fig. 4a) and degraded cartilages (Figs. 4b-4d). It is evident that all the hyperelastic models fitted within the upper and lower bounds of the experiments irrespective of healthy and degraded cartilages. However, in comparison with the mean value of the experiments, 1st order Ogden, 3rd order polynomial, and 2nd order reduced polynomial exhibit a moderate level of deviation irrespective of the native or degraded cartilages, except for c1:g3 (Fig. 4c), where the 3rd order polynomial model fitted very well. It is apparent that the Van der Waals fits well with the degraded cartilage (Figs. 4b-4c). Figure 5 shows the average goodness of fit with ￼ of the hyperelastic models of healthy and all those three enzyme cases. Evidently, all the models fit well to the experimental data, the lowest value of 96.76% for 1st order Ogden and the highest value with the 3rd order reduced polynomial and Van der Waals models (99.99%).



Fig. 4 Stress-strain plots of native (control) (a) and degraded cartilages—c1:g1 (b), c1:g3 (c), and c3:g1 (d) based on experiments with fitted hyperelastic material models. The graph shows average (black solid line) engineering stress with upper and lower bounds, , (gray shaded region), which is subjected to 20% of bulk strain. [c-collagenase; g-gelatinase]

Fig. 5 The value (Average of  ) of coefficient of determination of 1st order Ogden, 3rd order polynomial, 2nd order reduced polynomial and Van der Waals model. 





Fig. 6 Stress-strain plots of the native (control) (a) and degraded cartilages—c1:g1 (b), c1:g3 (c) and c3:g1 (d) based on experiments, and FE simulations using the calibrated hyperelastic material parameters. The graph shows average (black solid line) experimental engineering stress with upper and lower bounds, , (gray shaded region) subjected to 20% of bulk strain. [c-collagenase; g-gelatinase]
Experimental stress-strain plots of the native (control) and degraded cartilages along with the FE simulated stress-strain behavior have been shown in Fig. 6. It is evident that while the 1st order Ogden model fitted considerably well to the cartilages in different degraded states (Fig. 4), the corresponding FE simulations (Figs. 6a-6d) largely deviate when modeled with the 1st order Ogden model and falls even outside the lower bounds of the experimental results. Likewise, 3rd order polynomial based FE simulated stress-strain depicts large variation from the experimental observation except for the cartilage degraded with c3:g1 concentration ratio (Fig. 6d). However, it is apparent that the FE results with 2nd order reduced polynomial and Van der Waals models exhibit good agreement with our experimental observations, except a considerable deviation of the Van der Waals in the control, and 2nd order reduced polynomial in the c3:g1 degraded cartilages (Fig. 6d). Figure 7 shows the comparison of Young’s (elastic) modulus of native and degraded cartilages between experiments and FEA conducted with the hyperelastic constitutive models. The differences between the experimental and computational mean values of Young’s modulus produced by 1st order Ogden, 3rd order polynomial, 2nd order reduced polynomial and Van der Waals hyperelastic constitutive models respectively are  26.69%, 29.89%, 17.79%, 6.41% for control, 38.07%, 31.82%, 13.64%, 13.84% for c1:g1, 19.83%, 22.70%, 28.45%, 11.78% for c1:g3, and 28.17%, 14.68%, 16.27%, 18.25% for c3:g1, respectively. It is apparent that elastic modulus obtained via FEA using Van der Waals material model parameters apparently exhibit the closest approximation for both the native and degraded states.

Fig. 7 Comparison of elastic modulus(average) between experiment and FE simulation conducted with different hyperelastic material models for native (control) cartilage and cartilages treated with the enzyme concentration of c1:g1, c1:g3, and c3:g1. [c-collagenase; g-gelatinase]


Fig. 8 FE simulated contour plots of von Mises stress of native (control) and cartilages treated with the concentration ratio of c1:g1, c1:g3, and c3:g1 using fitted parameters of 1st order Ogden (a-d), 3rd order polynomial (e-h), 2nd order reduced polynomial (i-l) and Van der Waals (m-p) models at 20% of applied (compressive) bulk strain. [c-collagenase; g-gelatinase]
Figure 8 delineates the FE-simulated stress contours in the cartilages after indentation. With the degradation, the mechanical integrity reduces, which is why a trend of higher stress is observed in the degraded states compared to their control ones. 
The Van der Waals and 2nd order reduced polynomial models yielded better-fitted simulated results among the four selected models. Therefore, the material parameters for the 2nd order reduced polynomial and Van der Waals models have been discussed herein, the materials data for the 3rd order polynomial and Ogden models are shown in the appendix. Figure 9 shows the parametric variations between the control and degraded states. Figure 9(a) depicts that   decreased from 3.27 kPa to 2.55 kPa for c1:g1, 6.06 kPa to 3.88 kPa for c1:g3, and 6.54 kPa to 1.30 kPa for c3:g1. It is evident that decreased significantly in c3:g1 group, which experimentally exhibited the maximum degradation among the others (Mixon et al. 2022; Mixon et al. 2021). The effect of degradation has also been evident in Figure 9(b) where  value shows a maximum of 46.6% reduction in c3:g1 compared with a declination of 22.5% and 12.9% for c1:g1 and c1:g3, respectively. Compressibility parameter  was found close to zero and  was calculated to zero and do not play any major role. 

Fig. 9 Variation of material parameters(average)of 2nd order reduced polynomial model by curve fitting approach. (The differences were derived from the mean values of the two individual groups) [c-collagenase; g-gelatinase]


Fig. 10 Variation of Van der Waals model material parameters(average)by curve fitting approach. (The differences were derived from the mean values of the two individual groups) [c-collagenase; g-gelatinase]
	•	Figure 10 shows the variations of the material parameters for Van der Waals material constants. The initial shear modulus  at low strain decreased from 5.91 kPa, 10.79 kPa, 12.48 kPa to 4.22 kPa, 7.82 kPa, 3.84 kPa, respectively,  with higher concentrations of collagenase (Fig. 10a), while the locking stretch  remained almost unchanged in response to enzymatic alterations (Fig. 10b). The global interaction parameter  in the polymer chain was unaffected by the c1:g1 and c3:g1 MMP mixture;  however, c1:g3 notably reduced to 5.5% of the interaction compared to other MMPs (Fig. 10c). Despite observing a rise in values (changing from -0.67 to -1.01 for c1:g1, -.39 to -1.43 for c1:g3, and -1.21 to 1.41 for c3g1), a specific sequence pattern could not be identified. The compressibility parameter  exhibited no significant effect as well. Discussion
Cartilage stiffness varies significantly across different layers. The superficial layer, where collagen fibrils are densely packed and parallel to the articular surface, exhibits the highest tensile stiffness. Proteoglycan (PG) aggregates, on the other hand, occupy the interfibrillar space within the cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) and may serve as a protective barrier for collagen fibrils against enzymatic denaturation(Smith 1999).
Indentation testing suggests that collagen fibers play a more critical role in mechanical integrity than PG aggregates. The stress variation between control and treated groups at 20% bulk strain is approximately 24% for c1:g1, 29% for c1:g3, and ~50% for c3:g1. Interestingly, increased MMP-9 (gelatinase) concentration has minimal impact on aggregate degeneration(Mixon et al. 2021). When collagenase (a potent enzyme) is present alongside gelatinase, compressive cartilage stiffness is significantly affected. Collagenase denatures type II collagen in the ECM, making it more susceptible to further digestion by gelatinase (MMP-9). Gelatinases are responsible for cleaving the proteoglycan core protein–aggrecan.
Deformations of soft tissues involve complex mechanisms that are not fully understood. Phenomenological models have been crafted from macroscopic experimental observations to delineate the nonlinear elastic behavior of materials. In this study, we adopted a phenomenological approach to investigate the nonlinear compressive behavior of cartilage in healthy and degraded states. In this study, we determined the hyperelastic material constants of healthy and degraded cartilage using both principal stretch-based (Ogden) and invariant-based (polynomial, reduced polynomial, and Van der Waals) phenomenological hyperelastic constitutive models and evaluated the ability of each model to capture the different degraded states of cartilages’ stress-strain behavior. Isotropic hyperelastic models were previously used to study the mechanical behavior of cartilage at the human hip (Anderson et al., 2008, Henak et al., 2014), human elbow (Willing et al., 2013), human jaw (Koolstra and Van Eijden 2006), porcine knee (Butz et al., 2011), and bovine patella (Brown et al., 2009). However, the choice of an appropriate hyperelastic model relies on various factors, including the associated variables, parameter identification, and the alignment with experimental results. During this study, the models were selected based on the regression analysis of the fitted graphs that yielded results between 97% and 99% and the best match with the maximum stress at 20% of bulk strain. Additionally, models were selected considering their mathematical expressions to facilitate the easy numerical implementation of the model. In order to generate an averaged predicted graph, every model was simultaneously fitted to all data series for each stress-strain case derived from the indentation test conducted on both native and degraded cartilage explants. The current study presents data on the material constants of intact and enzymatically mediated degenerated bovine femoral cartilage derived from the isotropic hyperelastic models. After conducting several calibrations for fitting, we determined the parameter values to be incorporated into FE models. 
In this study, 1st order Ogden, 3rd order polynomial, 2nd order reduced polynomial, and Van der Waals models were elected as they demonstrated superior performance in fitting the experimental data compared to other phenomenological hyperelastic models. Nevertheless, 1st order Ogden and 3rd order polynomial exhibited significant deviations between the FE simulated and experimental stress-strain plot, leading us to exclude them from our final consideration. The hyperelastic constants of the 2nd order reduced polynomial model and Van der Waals model were significantly higher in the control specimens, implying higher cartilage stiffness (Figs. 9 and 10). The lower values of the hyperelastic material constants for the degraded specimens are most likely a consequence of degenerated cartilage associated with the relative abundance of MMP-1 (collagenases) and MMP-9 (gelatinases). 
In the 2nd order reduced polynomial model,  and  coefficients are associated with the linear and quadratic strain density functions, respectively and are dependent on the initial shear modulus and locking stress. When a material softens with moderate strains,   represents the initial shear modulus and  determines the curvature of the strain energy density function, which influences both the nonlinearity and the stiffness of a material. In this study, these two parameters varied significantly during the curved fitting stage and exhibited a good agreement with the effect of the enzymatically mediated changes in cartilage. The cartilage is incompressible; hence, the compressibility parameters   and   exhibited a very low value or zero. 
Van der Waals hyperelastic model considers the underlying microstructural features or molecular interactions and the combined effect of all parameters accurately in assessing the load-bearing capability of native and enzyme-mediated cartilage. Similar to the experimental data, the initial shear modulus  decreased more in c3:g1 since more load-bearing collagen fibrils were expected to deteriorate by adding a higher concentration of collagenase. Prior experiments showed that the load-bearing ability was significantly reduced for the cartilage degraded with c3:g1 concentration ratio (Mixon et al. 2022; Mixon et al. 2021), where due to a higher concentration of MMP-1 (collaegenases), the fibrils in the superficial zone are digested/degraded more and thereby reducing its mechanical integrity more than the other two concentration ratios. The unchanged locking stretch  inhibits the significant irreversible deformation at a critical transitional stretch, which proves the regaining cartilage’s shape memory effect after loading. The declining value of the parameter  for c1:g3 proves the declining interaction when the cartilage was affected by the gelatinase, which degrades the protein in the matrix and damages the structural integrity. Although the addressable value of the curve fitted is in the range of 0 to 1.0, the data fitting procedure may not necessarily yield a value between the stated range. This parameter is related to the repulsive force, which is a linear mixture parameter combining the invariant  and  where   is more dominant (Seibert and Schoche 2000). represents the volume changes, though the effect is negligible (Holzapfel 2002).
Phenomenological hyperelastic models, rooted in the observations of rubber-like materials undergoing uniform deformation, are structured on principles of principal stretch. Evaluating the predictive capacity of these models involves comparing their stress-strain or stress-stretch representations with traditional experimental findings (Holzapfel 2002). These models are widely used for modeling biological soft tissues (Kang et al. 2022). The invariant-based phenomenological models are often employed to characterize rubber-like materials, including isotropic materials (Jiang et al. 2022; Melly et al. 2021), but focus on the deformation tensors' principal invariants. However, it cannot explain the molecular-level interaction (Miehe et al. 2004). Although both 2nd order reduced polynomial and Van der Waals are invariant-based phenomenological models, Van der Waals doesn't explicitly focus on invariants of the deformation tensor. It has the potential parameters to highlight the molecular level interactions, repulsive force, and volume change. Therefore, Van der Waals has the capability to present cartilage more accurately. The coefficients of the reduced polynomial model can control the shape of the strain energy density function, but this function may not adequately represent the intricate nonlinear behavior exhibited by articular cartilage degraded differentially. Especially when capturing complex phenomena like swelling or compression, it may lack an adequate physical basis to describe the nonlinear behavior of articular cartilage.
Determination of appropriate hyperelastic constitutive model parameters requires comparing model predictions with experimental data. However, due to the substantial deformations experienced by cartilages and the considerable variation in stress-strain behavior across inter/intra (healthy and degraded) state cartilage, it is challenging to establish a single strain-energy density function that accurately captures the stress-strain relationship from any experiment (Kim et al. 2016). Another aspect to examine is the extent to which the suggested model parameters in this study can be applied. Although we achieved strong alignments between the hyperelastic material models and experimental findings, the parameter determination process relied solely on one form of experiment, the compression test. Certain hyperelastic models may prove to be less effective when data from a limited range of test types are available (Bidhendi et al. 2020). The Ogden model exhibited an admirable proficiency in accommodating a broad spectrum of experimental data, but calibration based solely on a single type of experiment, such as compression, as in this study, led to significant prediction errors in terms of stresses during FEA. Additionally, Using parameters obtaining material coefficients by averaging the model results fitted to individual data sets is not recommended as this approach is prone to yielding erroneous or non-physical outcomes (Robertson and Cook 2014) .  
While this study has significantly advanced our understanding of cartilage mechanics through hyperelastic modeling, it acknowledges certain limitations. Our models assume isotropic and homogeneous properties of cartilage, simplifying the inherently complex, anisotropic, and heterogeneous nature of actual tissue. This assumption is practical for avoiding complexity in more realistic models or when detailed experimental conditions are impractical. Nonetheless, future works should incorporate anisotropic hyperelastic models and depth-dependent properties to better capture cartilage behavior, as demonstrated by previous researchers (Wilson et al. 2005; Li et al. 2000; Pierce et al. 2013). Besides, the assumption of incompressibility is generally valid under fast dynamic loading due to fluid pressurization (Anderson et al. 2008; Ateshian et al. 2007), but as we used spherical indenter that caused nearly uniform pressure distribution through the thickness of the cartilage and minimized fluid flow across the radial direction. This effectively enhances the load bearing capacity of the interstitial fluid, maintaining the validity of the incompressibility assumption during the early stages of loading (Park et al. 2003). However, we recognize that as loading duration increases, fluid exudation may occur slowly. To address this, future work could incorporate poroelastic models to capture time dependent fluid flow and tissue compressibility.  

In conclusion, we have considered four phenomenological hyperelastic constitutive models to computationally (via FEA) investigate the cartilage mechanics in healthy and degraded states. There is perhaps no generalized fundamental mathematical form of a hyperelastic model (strain-energy function) that ensures a reasonable mechanical behavior in every possible situation (Ball and James 2002). Accordingly, it is reasonable to say that the 2nd order reduced polynomial and Van der Waals model are reasonably well validated with experimental stress-strain. However, the Van der Waals model is the preferred choice for enhanced precision. Furthermore, this research provides essential average material parameter models for conducting further computational analyses. Moreover, this study demonstrates how material parametric value evaluation can provide an insight into the degenerative condition of articular cartilage. 
Author contributions:
All authors have read and approved this submission; AI and SI carried out, all (AI, SI, MA, and TF) participated in the definition, design, and development of the work, and finally, the manuscript was written and reviewed by all authors (AI, SI, MA, and TF).
Declarations
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
Anderson AE, Ellis BJ, Maas SA, Peters CL, Weiss JA (2008) Validation of finite element predictions of cartilage contact pressure in the human hip joint 
Armstrong CG, Mow VC (1982) Variations in the intrinsic mechanical properties of human articular cartilage with age, degeneration, and water content J Bone Joint Surg Am 64:88-94
Ateshian GA, Ellis BJ, Weiss JA (2007) Equivalence between short-time biphasic and incompressible elastic material responses 
Ateshian GA, Mow V, Huiskes R (2005) Friction, lubrication, and wear of articular cartilage and diarthrodial joints Basic orthopaedic biomechanics and mechano-biology 3:447-494
Athanasiou K, Agarwal A, Dzida F (1994) Comparative study of the intrinsic mechanical properties of the human acetabular and femoral head cartilage Journal of Orthopaedic Research 12:340-349
Bae W, Schumacher B, Sah R (2007) Indentation probing of human articular cartilage: effect on chondrocyte viability Osteoarthritis and cartilage 15:9-18
Bae WC, Lewis CW, Levenston ME, Sah RL (2006) Indentation testing of human articular cartilage: effects of probe tip geometry and indentation depth on intra-tissue strain Journal of biomechanics 39:1039-1047
Ball J, James R (2002) The Scientific Life and Influence of¶ Clifford Ambrose Truesdell III Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis 161:1-26
Bidhendi AJ, Li H, Geitmann A (2020) Modeling the nonlinear elastic behavior of plant epidermis Botany 98:49-64
Bingham J et al. (2008) In vivo cartilage contact deformation in the healthy human tibiofemoral joint Rheumatology 47:1622-1627
Brown C, Nguyen T, Moody H, Crawford R, Oloyede A (2009) Assessment of common hyperelastic constitutive equations for describing normal and osteoarthritic articular cartilage Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part H: Journal of Engineering in Medicine 223:643-652
Budday S, Ovaert TC, Holzapfel GA, Steinmann P, Kuhl E (2020) Fifty shades of brain: a review on the mechanical testing and modeling of brain tissue Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 27:1187-1230
Carter TE et al. (2015) In vivo cartilage strain increases following medial meniscal tear and correlates with synovial fluid matrix metalloproteinase activity Journal of Biomechanics 48:1461-1468 doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2015.02.030
Changoor A, Fereydoonzad L, Yaroshinsky A, Buschmann MD (2010) Effects of refrigeration and freezing on the electromechanical and biomechanical properties of articular cartilage 
Chen AC et al. (2004) Mechanical Characterization of Native and Tissue-Engineered Cartilage. In: De Ceuninck F, Sabatini M, Pastoureau P (eds) Cartilage and Osteoarthritis: Volume 2: Structure and In Vivo Analysis. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, pp 157-190. doi:10.1385/1-59259-821-8:157
Coleman JL et al. (2013) Diurnal variations in articular cartilage thickness and strain in the human knee Journal of biomechanics 46:541-547
Gasser TC, Holzapfel GA (2002) A rate-independent elastoplastic constitutive model for biological fiber-reinforced composites at finite strains: continuum basis, algorithmic formulation and finite element implementation Computational Mechanics 29:340-360 doi:10.1007/s00466-002-0347-6
Gavin HP (2019) The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm for nonlinear least squares curve-fitting problems Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Duke University August 3
Henak CR, Kapron AL, Anderson AE, Ellis BJ, Maas SA, Weiss JA (2014) Specimen-specific predictions of contact stress under physiological loading in the human hip: validation and sensitivity studies Biomechanics and modeling in mechanobiology 13:387-400
Holzapfel GA (2002) Nonlinear solid mechanics: a continuum approach for engineering science. Kluwer Academic Publishers Dordrecht, 
Jiang M, Dai J, Dong G, Wang Z (2022) A comparative study of invariant-based hyperelastic models for silicone elastomers under biaxial deformation with the virtual fields method Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 136:105522
Kaliske M, Rothert H (1997) On the finite element implementation of rubber‐like materials at finite strains Engineering Computations 14:216-232
Kang W, Xu P, Yue Y, Wang L, Fan Y (2022) Difference analysis of phenomenological models with two variable forms for soft tissue quasi-static mechanical characterization Computers in Biology and Medicine 150:106150
Karimi A, Shojaei A, Tehrani P (2017) Mechanical properties of the human spinal cord under the compressive loading Journal of chemical neuroanatomy 86:15-18
Khaniki HB, Ghayesh MH, Chin R, Amabili M (2023) Hyperelastic structures: A review on the mechanics and biomechanics International Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics 148:104275
Kilian H-G (1981) Equation of state of real networks Polymer 22:209-217
Kilian H-G, Enderle H, Unseld K (1986) The use of the van der Waals model to elucidate universal aspects of structure-property relationships in simply extended dry and swollen rubbers Colloid and Polymer Science 264:866-876
Kim S, Jung C-l, Jung Y, Moon H, Lim H Biomimetic skin-type shear sensor. In: 2016 16th International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS), 2016. IEEE, pp 1331-1332
Kiviranta P, Rieppo J, Korhonen RK, Julkunen P, Töyräs J, Jurvelin JS (2006) Collagen network primarily controls Poisson's ratio of bovine articular cartilage in compression Journal of Orthopaedic Research 24:690-699
Kleemann R, Krocker D, Cedraro A, Tuischer J, Duda G (2005a) Altered cartilage mechanics and histology in knee osteoarthritis: relation to clinical assessment (ICRS Grade) Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 13:958-963
Kleemann R, Krocker D, Cedraro A, Tuischer J, Duda GN (2005b) Altered cartilage mechanics and histology in knee osteoarthritis: relation to clinical assessment (ICRS Grade) Osteoarthritis and cartilage 13:958-963
Korhonen R, Laasanen M, Töyräs J, Rieppo J, Hirvonen J, Helminen H, Jurvelin J (2002) Comparison of the equilibrium response of articular cartilage in unconfined compression, confined compression and indentation Journal of biomechanics 35:903-909
Liggett JA, Chen L-C (1994) Inverse transient analysis in pipe networks Journal of hydraulic engineering 120:934-955
Lin P-S, Le Roux de Bretagne O, Grasso M, Brighton J, StLeger-Harris C, Carless O (2023) Comparative Analysis of Various Hyperelastic Models and Element Types for Finite Element Analysis Designs 7:135
Luersen MA, Le Riche R, Guyon F (2004) A constrained, globalized, and bounded Nelder–Mead method for engineering optimization Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 27:43-54
Lyyra T, Kiviranta I, Väätäinen U, Helminen HJ, Jurvelin JS (1999) In vivo characterization of indentation stiffness of articular cartilage in the normal human knee Journal of biomedical materials research 48:482-487
Ma J, Arruda EM (2013) A micromechanical viscoelastic constitutive model for native and engineered anterior cruciate ligaments. In:  Computer Models in Biomechanics: From Nano to Macro. Springer, pp 351-363
Mansouri M, Darijani H (2014) Constitutive modeling of isotropic hyperelastic materials in an exponential framework using a self-contained approach International Journal of Solids and Structures 51:4316-4326
Melly SK, Liu L, Liu Y, Leng J (2021) A review on material models for isotropic hyperelasticity International Journal of Mechanical System Dynamics 1:71-88
Miehe C, Göktepe S, Lulei F (2004) A micro-macro approach to rubber-like materials—part I: the non-affine micro-sphere model of rubber elasticity Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 52:2617-2660
Mixon A (2021) A Comprehensive in Vitro Study to Investigate the Mutual Effect of MMPs-1 and 9 on Articular Cartilage Biomechanical Properties. University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Mixon A, Bahar-Moni AS, Faisal TR (2022) Mechanical characterization of articular cartilage degraded combinedly with MMP-1 and MMP-9 Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials:105131 doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2022.105131
Mixon A, Savage A, Bahar-Moni AS, Adouni M, Faisal T (2021) An in vitro investigation to understand the synergistic role of MMPs-1 and 9 on articular cartilage biomechanical properties Scientific reports 11:14409
Moerman KM, Fereidoonnezhad B, McGarry JP (2020) Novel hyperelastic models for large volumetric deformations International Journal of Solids and Structures 193:474-491
Mooney M (1940) A theory of large elastic deformation Journal of applied physics 11:582-592
Nissinen MT et al. (2021) Functional and structural properties of human patellar articular cartilage in osteoarthritis Journal of Biomechanics 126:110634
Ogden RW (1972) Large deformation isotropic elasticity–on the correlation of theory and experiment for incompressible rubberlike solids Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A Mathematical and Physical Sciences 326:565-584
Oloyede A, Broom N (1996) The biomechanics of cartilage load-carriage Connective tissue research 34:119-143
Park S, Hung CT, Ateshian GA (2004) Mechanical response of bovine articular cartilage under dynamic unconfined compression loading at physiological stress levels Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 12:65-73 doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2003.08.005
Patel JM, Wise BC, Bonnevie ED, Mauck RL (2019) A systematic review and guide to mechanical testing for articular cartilage tissue engineering Tissue Engineering Part C: Methods 25:593-608
Pelliciari M, Tarantino AM (2020) Equilibrium paths for von Mises trusses in finite elasticity Journal of Elasticity 138:145-168
Pierce DM, Trobin W, Trattnig S, Bischof H, Holzapfel GA (2009) A phenomenological approach toward patient-specific computational modeling of articular cartilage including collagen fiber tracking 
Previati G, Gobbi M, Mastinu G (2017) Silicone gels-comparison by derivation of material model parameters Polymer Testing 58:270-279
Richard F, Villars M, Thibaud S (2013) Viscoelastic modeling and quantitative experimental characterization of normal and osteoarthritic human articular cartilage using indentation Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials 24:41-52
Rieppo J et al. (2003) Structure-function relationships in enzymatically modified articular cartilage Cells Tissues Organs 175:121-132
Rivlin RS (1948) Large elastic deformations of isotropic materials IV. Further developments of the general theory Philosophical transactions of the royal society of London Series A, Mathematical and physical sciences 241:379-397
Rivlin RS, Saunders D (1951) Large elastic deformations of isotropic materials VII. Experiments on the deformation of rubber Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences 243:251-288
Robertson D, Cook D (2014) Unrealistic statistics: how average constitutive coefficients can produce non-physical results Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials 40:234-239
Robinson DL, Kersh ME, Walsh NC, Ackland DC, de Steiger RN, Pandy MG (2016) Mechanical properties of normal and osteoarthritic human articular cartilage Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 61:96-109 doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016.01.015
Saarakkala S, Laasanen M, Jurvelin J, Törrönen K, Lammi M, Lappalainen R, Töyräs J (2003) Ultrasound indentation of normal and spontaneously degenerated bovine articular cartilage Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 11:697-705
Sasson A, Patchornik S, Eliasy R, Robinson D, Haj-Ali R (2012) Hyperelastic mechanical behavior of chitosan hydrogels for nucleus pulposus replacement—Experimental testing and constitutive modeling Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials 8:143-153
Seibert D, Schoche N (2000) Direct comparison of some recent rubber elasticity models Rubber chemistry and technology 73:366-384
Setton LA, Elliott DM, Mow VC (1999) Altered mechanics of cartilage with osteoarthritis: human osteoarthritis and an experimental model of joint degeneration Osteoarthritis and cartilage 7:2-14
Shearer T (2015) A new strain energy function for the hyperelastic modelling of ligaments and tendons based on fascicle microstructure Journal of biomechanics 48:290-297
Smith RL (1999) Degradative enzymes in osteoarthritis Front Biosci 4:D704-D712
Steck D, Qu J, Kordmahale SB, Tscharnuter D, Muliana A, Kameoka J (2019) Mechanical responses of Ecoflex silicone rubber: Compressible and incompressible behaviors Journal of Applied Polymer Science 136:47025
Sutter EG, Widmyer MR, Utturkar GM, Spritzer CE, Garrett Jr WE, DeFrate LE (2015) In vivo measurement of localized tibiofemoral cartilage strains in response to dynamic activity The American journal of sports medicine 43:370-376
Szarko M, Muldrew K, Bertram JE (2010) Freeze-thaw treatment effects on the dynamic mechanical properties of articular cartilage BMC musculoskeletal disorders 11:1-8
Tan WS, Moore AC, Stevens MM (2023) Minimum design requirements for a poroelastic mimic of articular cartilage Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 137:105528
Tchetverikov I, Lohmander LS, Verzijl N, Huizinga TW, TeKoppele JM, Hanemaaijer R, DeGroot J (2005) MMP protein and activity levels in synovial fluid from patients with joint injury, inflammatory arthritis, and osteoarthritis Ann Rheum Dis 64:694-698 doi:10.1136/ard.2004.022434
Treloar LG (1975) The physics of rubber elasticity 
Weizel A et al. (2022) Hyperelastic parameter identification of human articular cartilage and substitute materials Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 133:105292
Woo S-Y, Akeson W, Jemmott G (1976) Measurements of nonhomogeneous, directional mechanical properties of articular cartilage in tension Journal of biomechanics 9:785-791
Yeoh OH (1993) Some forms of the strain energy function for rubber Rubber Chemistry and technology 66:754-771

